There are various kinds of phenomenon in nature and computer science
which can be modelled as graphs. Graphs can be thought of as points
(called vertices or nodes) related to each other by edges. The points
can be humans in a social netwrok, genes in a gene expression network,
proteins and metabolites interacting with each other in a cell, various
living species in an ecology or a food-web. The nature of relations
between such objects can be causation, interdependence, interaction,
etc. Neural Networks, both natural and artificial are graphs too. There
is a new field emerging in computer science and statistical mechanics
called *Complexity*, which promises to enlighten us about phenomenon
such as life, ecology, intelligence, society and economy. Graphs stand
as one of the fundamental tool to model and study such complexity. See
Chapter 1 of [@Gros2015].

Reducing a real world problem to a graph may amount to loosing details
but as graph theory has developed a number of tools for analysis and
insight these tools become available immideately for a well formed
inquiry. Therefore once a concept in Graph theory is learned then just
like other species in Mathematics such as integers or vectors etc, they
can be applied in a variety of fields of study.

Although the most dependeble way to study Graph Theory should be
mathematical formalism to state the terms, definitions and theorems;
visualization of such concepts can act as a first stepping stone for the
uninitiated. It can also act as an aid for a practitioner to enrich his
understanding or to view the same concept the same concept in a
different light.

It's true that using a particular example to define a topic in
mathematics may diminish it's generality. But a particular instance of a
topic can give a concrete confidence to a student about his
understanding of the topic in consideration. It is expected that a
concrete example can be extrapolated by a student's mind for a variety
of situations and also a general understanding.
