% Evaluation

\section{Testing}

Automation of testing for this project was done by using a mix of Property
based Testing and Unit Testing. Both paradigms of testing can be implemented
for Elm projects using the library called \emph{elm-test} and a cli-tool which
goes by the same name. Writing test files in Elm is the same as writing any
other program. The test functions can generate input test cases (specially in
the case of property based testing) and use boolean predicates to generate the
output in terms of $Pass$ or $Fail$.

\subsection{Property based Testing}
Testing of components of Graph module was done using Property based testing.
This paradigm of testing was introduced for the first time for Haskell (a
functional programming language). It checks if the output of a function
satisfies certain prescribed properties. These properties are specified as
boolean predicates.

For example, a function which constructs a fully connected graph (a graph in
which all the vertices are connected to each other by one edge) with $n$
vertices, will form $n \times (n - 1) / 2$ edges. The number of edges of the output
graph are matched up against this mathematical reality. The function passed
the test against a vast number of auto generated inputs.

Similarily, a cyclical graph i.e one in which the vertices are connected in a
pattern such as this: A -- B -- C -- D -- A, with n vertices will have the
number of edges equal to $n$. A function which constructs such a graph can be
property based tested by comparing the number of edges it has with the number
of vertices, which in this case should be equal.

\subsection{Unit testing}

\subsection{Manual System Testing}
The system was continously tested manually during the development of the
project. Regardless, towards the end of the development a planned scheme for
interacting with the system for the black box testing of the application was
executed to search for unexpected behaviour. See \autoref{appendix:
manualTesting} for the details of the test and results. The application's
behaviour against all the tests was as expected.
